Pfizer Is Said to Near a $68 Billion Deal for Wyeth 

Pfizer, the world’s largest drug maker, agreed in principle on Sunday night to acquire a rival, Wyeth, for $68 billion, according to people involved in the negotiations. Barring an 11th-hour twist, the transaction is expected to be announced Monday morning, these people said.

The deal would not only create a pharmaceutical behemoth but would be a rarity in the current financial tumult: a big acquisition that is not a desperate merger of two banks orchestrated by the government.

It would also be the first big merger backed by Wall Street in months. According to the research firm Capital IQ, it would be the biggest merger in the country in nearly three years since AT&T and BellSouth combined in a $70 billion deal in March 2006. And while credit has been notoriously tight of late, five banks have agreed to lend Pfizer more than $25 billion to pay for the deal. Pfizer, which has $26 billion in cash and equivalents, would finance the remainder through a combination of cash and stock.

But it could be a deal steeped in caution. While boards of both companies agreed to the broad outlines of the deal and its price over the weekend, these people said, one issue appeared to be a sticking point: whether Pfizer would be allowed to renege if the economy worsened or Wyeth’s prospects faded.

In better times, deals often falter on matters of strategy or price. But given the current economic climate, the sticking point is uncertainty over whether the deal will be completed. Pfizer was said to be forced to agree to pay a $4.5 billion breakup fee if it did not complete the deal under certain circumstances, a staggering amount that is almost twice as much as a typical fee on a deal of this size in better times.

But if the acquisition is made, it may demonstrate that Wall Street is willing to lend again, at least to the nation’s top companies with the best credit ratings.

“If banks need to send a message that they’re loaning, they want to be loaning to this quality of company,” said Catherine Arnold, an analyst at Credit Suisse.

Pfizer’s bid is being financed by four banks that received federal bailout money: Goldman Sachs, JPMorgan Chase, Citigroup and Bank of America, these people said. Such banks have been criticized for not doing more lending since they received the government funds. In addition, they said, Barclays, which acquired Lehman Brothers out of bankruptcy in the fall, is also providing financing. The lenders are advising Pfizer; Wyeth, meanwhile, is being advised by Morgan Stanley and Evercore Partners.

Pfizer appears to be taking advantage of the bad market for credit to buy Wyeth at a lower price than it might fetch if competing bids emerged, which analysts do not expect.

“They have a unique opportunity now because not everybody can get that capital,” said Barbara Ryan, an analyst at Deutsche Bank. “They’re probably one of the few companies in the world that can get that capital. These are going to be among the best companies in the U.S. to extend credit to.”

Because the combined company is expected to generate more than $20 billion in cash each year, Ms. Ryan said, “Even when they borrow money, they will still have plenty of revenue.”

Under the terms of the deal being negotiated, Pfizer would pay $50.19 a share for the company — $33 a share in cash and 0.985 Pfizer shares worth $17.19 a share based on Pfizer’s closing price on Friday — about a 15 percent premium, people involved in the negotiations said. Wyeth’s management team would depart, these people said.

On Friday, investors applauded the possibility of a deal. Shares of Wyeth closed at $43.74, up $4.91, or 12.6 percent, after news reports of the talks. Pfizer rose 24 cents, or 1.4 percent, to close at $17.45.

Pfizer expects to save $4 billion annually by combining with Wyeth; those savings will be phased in over 3 years.

Pfizer’s chief executive, Jeffrey B. Kindler, first approached Wyeth in the spring of 2008 with a simple phone call, people involved in the talks said. The negotiations heated up in the summer, but appeared to collapse when the banking system went into a tailspin in September and October.

Since then, there were several brief moments when it appeared the deal would move ahead, but then the talks would fall apart once again, usually over financing, these people said. It was apparently only within the last week or so that the financing commitment came together.

One of the delicate points of negotiation Sunday night involved the circumstances that would allow Pfizer to walk away from the deal.

For Mr. Kindler, a lawyer who came to Pfizer from McDonald’s, the deal may be a lifesaver for the company. Pfizer faces the expiration of its patent rights to Lipitor, the best-selling drug in the world, in 2011, which accounted for a quarter of the company’s 2007 revenue of $48 billion.

Still, even with the deal, much remains undone for Pfizer, facing product, patent and pipeline problems for other drugs as well.

“It’s not just Lipitor,” Ms. Arnold wrote last year in a report to investors. Pfizer faces a historic run of 14 patent expirations through 2014, which would add up to lost revenue of about $35 billion as those drugs give way to cheap generics, according to Ms. Arnold. Pfizer is not alone among big drug makers with its patent problem. Merck, Bristol Myers Squibb and Eli Lilly are all facing their own patent losses in the next five years. “Everybody’s starting at the same challenges down the road,” said Ms. Ryan.

She said that Mr. Kindler, who became chief executive in July 2006, had probably not been in a position to make a deal like Wyeth until after he had cut costs, revamped Pfizer’s core business and accepted the reality that the internal research pipeline was not producing blockbusters. “Hope springs eternal from the research pipeline,” Ms. Ryan said.
