On Day of Comebacks, Biggest Belongs to Dokic

There were comebacks aplenty Sunday as a warm afternoon of tennis stretched, as is too common at the Australian Open, into the middle of the night.

 Dinara Safina saved two match points before rallying to defeat the French teenager Alizé Cornet. Roger Federer erased a two-set deficit against the huge-hitting, high-strung Tomas Berdych. But the best comeback tale of this Grand Slam tournament remains Jelena Dokic, the off-again, on-again Australian with the deeply troubled past who continued to claw her way through the women’s draw despite a world ranking of 187.

On Sunday, with a sellout crowd of 15,000 in Rod Laver Arena suffering along with her, Dokic was down by 1-3 in the third set against Alisa Kleybanova, the same 19-year-old Russian who had ambushed Ana Ivanovic in the previous round.

But what was a mere third-set deficit to Dokic, now 25, who has had to overcome much more powerful forces to keep playing this game? The obstacles include depression, financial difficulty and her impulsive father and her former coach, Damir, with whom she has now severed contact.

It was Damir Dokic who brought her to Australia in 1994 to escape the conflict in their native Yugoslavia and turn her into a tennis champion. It was Damir Dokic who then alienated tennis authorities here and elsewhere: getting thrown out of the United States Open in 2000 after an obscenity-filled tirade and being barred from the women’s tour for six months.

It was Damir Dokic who was the hard-driving force behind Jelena’s decision to leave Australia, renounce her nationality and play first for Yugoslavia and then Serbia. In 2001, he also accused Australian Open organizers of rigging the draw against her before and after she lost to No. 2 seed Lindsay Davenport in the first round when Dokic was 17.

But the luck of the draw is finally with Dokic’s daughter this January. This is her first appearance in any Grand Slam event in three years. Again playing for Australia, she has won four straight matches, all in three sets: beating 17th-seeded Anna Chakvetadze, 11th-seeded Caroline Wozniacki and 29th-seeded Kleybanova with her country paying increasingly close attention.

It has not always been pretty. Dokic’s hard-running baseline style is much closer to workmanlike than poetry. She beat Kleybanova, 7-5, 5-7, 8-6, despite weary legs and very inconsistent play and even despite spraining her left ankle while leading 6-5 in the final set, falling hard as she shuffled to return serve and the sole of her shoe caught on the hard-court surface.

But Dokic would not lose her balance again until she had clinched her unlikely spot in the final eight, dropping to her knees in tears: hardly for the first time this tournament.

“I didn’t play my best and didn’t feel great really, but kept on going with my head, so that’s what pulled me through today,” said Dokic, who has now reached at least the quarterfinals at all four Grand Slam events. “At times I couldn’t even get myself, the crowd going. I couldn’t even scream ‘Come on’ anymore I was so tired.”

Little more than an hour before the official start of Australia Day, the home crowd had its reward, and Dokic will get rewards, too. Once ranked as high as No. 4, she is now guaranteed of returning to the top 100, which should allow her direct entry into the other Grand Slam tournaments.

To go any further in this one, she will have to recover and pull off her biggest upset yet by defeating the third-seeded Safina. “This is like a really pure match with no pressure on me,” Dokic said. “Even if I lose easily, it will not be a surprise.”

Delighted by her tennis revival, she sounds much less eager to renew contact with her father, still in Serbia and now making rumblings in the Australian news media about a last-minute visit to Melbourne to watch his estranged child play in person.

“I’ve said always my whole story with him is finished,” she said. “It would have to be an unbelievable miracle for him to change. I don’t see that happening. I have my tennis, and I have my life. I want to do it that way. I just don’t, knowing him, I just don’t see any possibilities. We are really different and really disagree on pretty much everything.”

Both father and daughter apologized publicly last week to Australians for some of their past behavior, particularly the decision to leave the country in 2001.

“It is my biggest, biggest mistake,” he told Melbourne’s Sunday Herald Sun.

Jelena Dokic is not the only surprise women’s quarterfinalist in Melbourne this year. Carla Suárez Navarro, an un-seeded Spaniard with a now-rare one-handed backhand, continued her run Monday, defeating her compatriot Anabel Medina Garrigues, 6-3, 6-2.

Suárez Navarro, who is from the Canary Islands, also reached the quarterfinals at last year’s French Open. In Australia, she upset Venus Williams in three sets in the second round and will now face No. 4 Elena Dementieva, who defeated No. 18 Dominika Cibulkova, 6-2, 6-2.

Cornet, 19, came as close as tennis allows to an upset against Safina.

After losing the opening set in a hurry, Cornet worked her way into the match, varying her spins and trajectories and giving Safina extra opportunities to lose her rhythm. Safina, the younger sister of the men’s star Marat Safin, would finish with 52 unforced errors to 32 winners and with eight double faults. But Safina has proved that she can win ugly, saving match points in two different matches on her way to last year’s French Open final.

This time, she saved two in the same match: both coming with Cornet serving at 5-4, 40-15 in the third set. Cornet lost the first match point by going for a forehand down the line that sailed just wide. Cornet then squandered the second with a backhand error. Safina was on her way and was the more aggressive, powerful presence down the stretch as she closed out a 6-2, 2-6, 7-5 victory.

Not that Safina, a self-critical sort, was prepared to take all the credit. “Maybe she was just not ready to win this match," Safina said of Cornet. "Because she had it all in the hands.”
