Iraq Leader Pushes for Election Gains, but Some Fear Iron Hand 

Few have as much to gain or lose from the provincial elections on Saturday as Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki, whose party is battling rivals across Iraq.

From palm grove-sheltered villages, like his hometown here in southern Iraq, to the crowded streets of Baghdad, Iraqis will cast votes that will strongly signal how much power Mr. Maliki, an increasingly authoritarian leader, will be able to command. Either the vote will strengthen his party at the local level or it will bolster his rivals, who want to keep more power in the provinces.

For now, Mr. Maliki is trying to reassure Iraqis that while he will be a strong leader, he will also respect local interests. At a gathering of thousands of tribal leaders in Karbala recently, he said, “The iron centralization has ended,” and added that the country would have federalism, a term used here to mean provincial power.

Many Iraqi politicians — even some onetime allies — do not believe him. They fear a return to the sway of a single leader, arbitrary and bloodthirsty, with power concentrated in Baghdad.

“That’s why there is a crisis of confidence now; it might not be realistic, but a person who has been bitten by a snake is afraid every time he sees a rope,” said Hadi al-Ameri, a leader of the Islamic Supreme Council of Iraq, one of the largest Shiite parties and one that in the last election ran in a coalition with Mr. Maliki’s Dawa Party.

Mr. Maliki’s critics have been rattled by his efforts to control the armed forces more directly, a reminder of the days when Saddam Hussein personally controlled a number of special security forces loyal only to him. Mr. Maliki has reshuffled military commanders and created two handpicked military forces that report primarily to him as the commander in chief rather than to the Interior or Defense Ministries.

He has also created tribal councils across the country that are directly linked to his office, which critics fear are stalking-horses to extend the reach of the Dawa Party and make gains in the provincial elections at the expense of his rivals. The councils are often financed by the government and organized by local Dawa members.

Mr. Maliki’s actions seem prompted by fears of another sort, ones born of his history as a dissident and exile: that the outlawed Baath Party he fought for so many years will regroup and oust him, particularly as the American forces that have supported him begin to withdraw.

“If Bush and Obama were to suddenly leave, then Baathist officers would surround the Green Zone and kill all the leaders,” said Mohammed Ridha al-Numani, a Shiite cleric who has known Mr. Maliki since they lived in Iran in exile in the 1980s.

While that seems unlikely any time soon, such experiences of terror and embattlement have shaped the way Mr. Maliki governs. “His party, Dawa, had to operate secretly, in cells, like Communist parties in non-Communist countries; this makes a lot of sense for guerrilla warfare, but not for nation building,” said Joost Hiltermann, the director of the International Crisis Group’s Istanbul office and an expert on Iraq. “So you end up with a paranoid, very closed circle around you; no open debate. And in Iraq, you have to build a coalition government.”

The anger at Mr. Maliki from the political class is strong enough that he has twice narrowly missed being voted out of office, in December and in late 2007. Both efforts failed because his opponents could not agree on a replacement. And Mr. Maliki is gaining popularity. Recent polling suggests that he has the most favorable ratings of any Iraqi politician.

The Americans lobbied strongly against deposing Mr. Maliki primarily because stability, as much as democracy, has been their short-term goal and they feared a vacuum that would destabilize the fragile country.

“You have to remember what it was like in 2006 when Iraq was between prime ministers; there was no one in charge, there was sectarian killing, 60, 70 bodies a day and that was just in Baghdad,” said a senior American diplomat.

Few people inside or outside Iraq believe that Mr. Maliki will quickly accrue the kind of power that Mr. Hussein wielded. Checks are embedded in the new Iraqi system, including the fact that a prime minister cannot freely choose his own ministers. And the country has already agreed to devolve significant power to the provinces — although how that will work in practice remains ambiguous and fiercely contested.

But many fear backsliding. “Maliki thinks that more power in the center is better,” said Fuad Hussain, chief of staff to Massoud Barzani, the leader of the Iraqi Kurdistan region, who has often been at odds with Mr. Maliki. “The problem is two things: What is the limit of that power? Who decides the limit?” 
